Catalog Examples Document (#263)
killbill/killbill-docs: userguide/tutorials/catalog-examples.adoc

= Catalog Examples

> This document provides examples of catalogs and how they affect  invoices/subscriptions. 

Author: Fixed

== How to Use This Document

Each section in this document corresponds to a particular catalog component and provides examples of catalogs that demonstrate that catalog component. 

You can try out the various examples in each section by:

* Uploading the corresponding catalog (via Kaui or https://killbill.github.io/slate/#catalog-upload-a-catalog-as-xml[Upload Catalog] API call)
* Creating an account (via Kaui or https://killbill.github.io/slate/#account-create-an-account[Create Account] API call)

* Creating a subscription as required (via Kaui or https://killbill.github.io/slate/#subscription-create-a-subscription[Create Subscription] API call)

> * Triggering an invoice dry-run (via Kaui or https://killbill.github.io/slate/#invoice-generate-a-dry-run-invoice[Generate Dry Run] API call)

Author: Fixed

== Prerequisites

> Ensure that you have gone through the https://docs.killbill.io/latest/userguide_subscription.html#components-catalog[Subscription User Guide] and are familiar with the various catalog components like products, plans, phases.

Author: Fixed

== Billing Modes

> A catalog needs to include a *Billing Mode* as explained in the https://docs.killbill.io/latest/invoice_subsystem.html#_overview[invoicing] document. 

Author: Fixed

> Quick summary about Billing modes:

Author: Fixed

* Can be specified at the *catalog* level or on a *per-plan* basis.
* *IN_ADVANCE* indicates that each recurring subscription is charged at the _beginning_ of the billing period.

* *IN_ARREAR* indicates that each recurring subscription is charged at the _end_ of the billing period.

> This section provides examples of catalogs with different billing modes. For simplicity sake, only catalogs with catalog level billing modes are demonstrated below, however the behavior is the same even when a per-plan billing mode is used.

Reviewer: @reshmabidikar - Regarding catalog-level versus plan-level billing modes, should we refer them to https://docs.killbill.io/latest/userguide_subscription.html#components-catalog-usage?

> This section provides examples of catalogs with different billing modes. For simplicity sake, only catalogs with catalog level billing modes are demonstrated below, however the behavior is the same even when a per-plan billing mode is used.

Author: @FlowWriter, I may be wrong, but I think per-plan billing is not the same as https://docs.killbill.io/latest/userguide_subscription.html#components-catalog-usage. Per-plan billing refers to specifying the billing mode (`IN_ARREAR` or `IN_ADVANCE`) at the plan level instead of the catalog level as explained [here](https://docs.killbill.io/latest/invoice_subsystem.html#_overview) whereas https://docs.killbill.io/latest/userguide_subscription.html#components-catalog-usage refers to usage billing. @pierre , can you please confirm if this is correct?

> This section provides examples of catalogs with different billing modes. For simplicity sake, only catalogs with catalog level billing modes are demonstrated below, however the behavior is the same even when a per-plan billing mode is used.

Reviewer 2: Yup, correct!

_Historical fun fact: we introduced the ability to set the billing mode at the plan level when we first implemented usage-based pricing. Before, only a single global billing mode was supported._

> Also, for simplicity sake, all the catalogs demonstrated in this section include a single product (`STANDARD`) and a single plan (`standard-monthly`) corresponding to it.

Author: Fixed

=== IN_ADVANCE billing mode

This example uses the  https://github.com/killbill/killbill-docs/blob/1a945188c0ef53a3c7f797b4890514d35c09c46f/catalogs/in-advance-billing.xml[In Advance Billing] catalog. It specifies an *IN_ADVANCE* billing mode. In this case, the `standard-monthly` plan has a single `EVERGREEN` phase with a monthly recurring charge of `$24.95` (plan phases are explained in the next section).

[options="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
|Action   |Result   
//-------------

> |Create a subscription on `2021-09-17`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for  `2021-09-17` to `2021-10-17` since *IN_ADVANCE* billing is used.

Author: @FlowWriter, while this is a good suggestion, I will skip this for now as this would require making changes to the entire document.

> |Create a subscription on `2021-09-17`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for  `2021-09-17` to `2021-10-17` since *IN_ADVANCE* billing is used.

Reviewer: Okay

This section provides examples of catalogs that demonstrate the various plan phases.

All the catalogs demonstrated in this section use `IN_ADVANCE` billing mode. Also, as before, all the catalogs include a single product (`STANDARD`) and a single plan (`standard-monthly`) corresponding to it.

=== No Trial and Fixed Term

This example uses the  https://github.com/killbill/killbill-docs/blob/1a945188c0ef53a3c7f797b4890514d35c09c46f/catalogs/fixedterm-no-trial.xml[Fixed Term No Trial] catalog. In this case, the `standard-monthly` plan has a single `FIXEDTERM` phase for a period of `6` weeks with a weekly recurring charge of `$24.95`. So, users will be charged `$24.95` weekly for `6` weeks after which the fixed term ends.
[options="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
|Action   |Result   
//-------------
|Create a subscription on `2021-09-10`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for `2021-09-10` to `2021-10-10` 
|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-09-18`    |Invoice generated for  `$24.95` for `2021-09-17` to `2021-09-24`  
|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-15`    |Invoice generated for  `$24.95` for `2021-10-15` to `2021-10-22`   

> |Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-29`    |No invoice generated as the fixed term is over.  

Author: @FlowWriter, agreed, specifying the time periods as `Sept 10 - Sept 16` or using a calendar would be better than just mentioning dates.  However, let's keep this on hold for now, my first priority would be to complete the document for all the different catalog components. I am currently working on round 2 of the document that explains the other catalog components (plan change rules, plan cancellation rules, and so on) and I'd like to complete that first. @pierre, I'd be interested in knowing what you think.

> |Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-29`    |No invoice generated as the fixed term is over.  

Reviewer: No worries!

> |Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-29`    |No invoice generated as the fixed term is over.  

Reviewer 2: Yup, that makes sense to me: let's get the content right first, and then let's try to make it a bit more visually appealing.

[options="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
|Action   |Result   
//-------------
|Create a subscription on `2021-09-10`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for `2021-09-10` to `2021-10-10` 
|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-10`    |Invoice generated for  `$24.95` for `2021-10-10` to `2021-11-10`  
|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2022-05-10`    |Invoice generated for  `$24.95` for `2022-05-10` to `2022-06-10` 
|===

=== Trial and Monthly Evergreen Phase

This example uses the  https://github.com/killbill/killbill-docs/blob/1a945188c0ef53a3c7f797b4890514d35c09c46f/catalogs/monthly-with-trial.xml[Monthly With Trial] catalog. In this case, the `standard-monthly` plan has a `TRIAL` phase of `10` days followed by an `EVERGREEN` phase with a monthly recurring charge of `$24.95`. So, users will not be charged for the first `10` days after which they will be charged `$24.95` monthly in perpetuity.

[options="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
|Action   |Result   
//-------------

> |Create a subscription on `2021-09-10`   |Invoice generated for `$0` due to trial phase

Author: Not sure I understand this one :). Do you mean that it is possible to hide a $0 invoice in Kaui?

> |Create a subscription on `2021-09-10`   |Invoice generated for `$0` due to trial phase

Reviewer: Actually, what I meant was that the Kill Bill customer could avoid displaying it to their customer. But I don't think this is the right document for this information, so you can close it out. :-)

//-------------
|Create a subscription on `2021-09-13`   |Invoice generated for `$74.95` for `2021-09-13` to `2021-10-13` (Fixed price as well as recurring price)
|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-13`    |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for `2021-10-13` to `2021-11-13` (only recurring price)  
|===

=== Discount and Evergreen Phase

This example uses the  https://github.com/killbill/killbill-docs/blob/1a945188c0ef53a3c7f797b4890514d35c09c46f/catalogs/discount-and-evergreen.xml[Discount and Evergreen] catalog. In this case, the `standard-monthly` plan has a `DISCOUNT` phase of `3` months (with a monthly charge of `$4.95`) followed by an `EVERGREEN` phase with a monthly recurring charge of `$24.95`. So, users will be charged `$4.95` (discount price) for the first `3` months. After that, they will be charged a recurring price of `$24.95` monthly in perpetuity.  

[options="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
|Action   |Result   
//-------------
|Create a subscription on `2021-09-15`   |Invoice generated for `$4.95` due to `DISCOUNT` phase
|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-15`    |Invoice generated for  `$4.95` for `2021-10-15` to `2021-11-15`  

> |Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-12-15`    |Discount phase ends, Invoice generated for  `$24.95` for `2021-12-15` to `2022-01-15`   

Reviewer: Please change "Invoice" to "invoice."

[options="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
|Action   |Result   
//-------------
|Create a new account. Specify BCD as `25` |Account created with BCD set to `25`
|Create a subscription on `2021-09-16`   |Invoice generated for `$7.24` for `2021-09-16` to `2021-09-25` (prorated)
|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-09-25`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for `2021-09-25` to `2021-10-25` 
|===

==== Case 3: Account with no BCD, multiple subscriptions on different days 

Even if there are multiple subscriptions associated with an account, all the subscriptions are aligned with the BCD. If the BCD is not explicitly set, it 
defaults to the first bill date of the first subscription. All subsequent subscriptions use this BCD.

[options="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
|Action   |Result   
//-------------
|Create a new account. Leave BCD field empty  |Account created, BCD is blank.
|Create a subscription on `2021-09-17`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for `2021-09-17` to `2021-10-17`. BCD set to `17` (Since subscription is created on 17th)

> |Create a subscription, with date as `2021-09-25`   |No invoice generated

Reviewer: So here the system doesn't generate the invoice because the account BCD is the 17th?

> |Create a subscription, with date as `2021-09-25`   |No invoice generated

Author: @FlowWriter, the system does not generate an invoice since a future date is specified. I've now made this clear in the document.

> |Create a subscription, with date as `2021-09-25`   |No invoice generated

Reviewer: Okay

|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-25`   | Invoice generated with two invoice items corresponding to both subscriptions for `$49.90`. 
|===

=== Subscription Billing Alignment

When `SUBSCRIPTION` billing alignment is specified in the catalog, each subscription is invoiced separately as per its bill date. This holds true even for subscriptions in the same bundle. So, if there are multiple subscriptions associated with an account, each subscription will be invoiced separately as per its creation date irrespective of whether they are in the same subscription bundle or different subscription bundles.

This example uses the  https://github.com/killbill/killbill-docs/blob/1a945188c0ef53a3c7f797b4890514d35c09c46f/catalogs/subscription-billing-alignment.xml[Subscription Billing Alignment] catalog. It specifies `SUBSCRIPTION` billing alignment.

It has only one product (`Standard`). However, it has multiple plans corresponding to the `Standard` product as follows:

[options="header",cols="1,1,1"]
|===
|Plan Name   |Product|Plan Description
//----------------------
|standard_monthly   |Standard   |Single EVERGREEN phase with a monthly recurring charge of $24.95   

> |standard_annual  |Standard   |Single EVERGREEN phase with an annual recurring charge of $275  

Reviewer: I would keep using the dash instead of the underscore as you have in the previous sections: standard-monthly, standard-annual

Author: Agreed, I think it was a typo

|===

The following table lists the actions and their results:

[options="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
|Action   |Result   
//-------------
|Create a new account. Specify BCD as `25`  |Account created with BCD set to `25`
|Create a subscription for the `standard-monthly` plan on `2021-09-17`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for `2021-09-17` to `2021-10-17` (BCD is ignored, subscription is billed as per its creation date)
|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-17`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for `2021-10-17` to `2021-11-17` 

> |Create a subscription for the `standard-annual` plan with date as `2021-09-30`   |No invoice generated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Create a subscription for the `standard-annual` plan with date of `2021-09-30`   |No invoice generated
```

Reviewer: Why is the invoice not generated here?

Author: The invoice is not generated because a future date is specified, I've now made this clear in the document.

|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-09-30`   |Invoice generated for `$275` for `2021-09-30` to `2022-09-30` 

> |Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-17`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for `2021-10-17` to `2021-11-17` corresponding to `standard-monthly` plan 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-11-17`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for `2021-11-17` to `2021-12-17` corresponding to `standard-monthly` plan 
```

|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2022-09-30`   |Invoice generated for `$275` for `2022-09-30` to `2023-09-30` corresponding to `standard-annual` plan  
|===

> As mentioned above, even if there is an addon plan associated with a subscription, the addon plan will be invoiced as per its own date and NOT be aligned with the subscription billing date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, even if there is an add-on plan associated with a subscription, the add-on plan is invoiced as per its own date and is NOT aligned with the subscription billing date.
```

Author: I've removed this text and added a note at the top of this section.

=== Bundle Billing Alignment

When `BUNDLE` billing alignment is specified in the catalog, all subscriptions in a bundle are invoiced together. The bill day is derived from the first bill date of the first subscription. 

> This example uses the  https://github.com/killbill/killbill-docs/blob/1a945188c0ef53a3c7f797b4890514d35c09c46f/catalogs/bundle-billing-alignment.xml[Bundle Billing Alignment] catalog. It specifies `BUNDLE` billing alignment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example uses the https://github.com/killbill/killbill-docs/blob/1a945188c0ef53a3c7f797b4890514d35c09c46f/catalogs/bundle-billing-alignment.xml[Bundle Billing Alignment] catalog. It specifies `BUNDLE` billing alignment. 
```

Reviewer: There is an extra space here. Please delete.

It has a `BASE` and an `ADD_ON` product as follows:

[options="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
|Product   |Category   
//-------------
|Standard   |Base   
|RemoteControl   |Add_on   
|===

It has two plans corresponding to both products as follows:

[options="header",cols="1,1,1"]
|===
|Plan Name   |Product|Plan Description
//----------------------
|standard_monthly   |Standard   |Single `EVERGREEN` phase with a monthly recurring charge of `$24.95`   
|remotecontrol-monthly   |RemoteControl   |Single `EVERGREEN` phase with a monthly recurring charge of `$17.95`    
|===

The following table lists the actions and their results:

[options="header",cols="1,1"]
|===
|Action   |Result   
//-------------
|Create a new account. Specify BCD as `25`  |Account created with BCD set to `25`
|Create a subscription for the `standard-monthly` plan on `2021-09-20`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for `2021-09-20` to `2021-10-20` (BCD is ignored, subscription is billed as per its creation date)
|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-20`   |Invoice generated for `$24.95` for `2021-10-20` to `2021-11-20`

> |Add the `remotecontrol-monthly` add-on to the existing subscription with date as `2021-09-30`   |No invoice generated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Add the `remotecontrol-monthly` add-on to the existing subscription with date of `2021-09-30`   |No invoice generated
```

Reviewer: So here the system does not auto-generate the invoice because it's an add-on product?

Author: @FlowWriter, no, the system does not auto-generate the invoice because it's a future date. I think we need to make this clear in the document. I'll make changes.

Reviewer: Did you clarify this somewhere?

|Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-09-30`   |Invoice generated for `$11.97` for `2021-09-30` to `2021-10-20` corresponding to the `remotecontrol-monthly` plan (Prorated since `BUNDLE` billing alignment is used) 

> |Trigger invoice dry run with target date `2021-10-20`   |Invoice generated for `$42.90` for `2021-10-20` to `2021-11-20` corresponding to both plans

Reviewer: Is this a case of line 367 OR line 368? It's not clear to me if 367 is an optional scenario in which the business decides to use proration, whereas line 368 is a scenario where 367 (proration) is skipped and the business just waits until Oct 20th to bill.

Author: In the case of 367, the business uses proration since the addon needs to be billed along with the base plan (The base plan is billed on the 20th and `BUNDLE` billing alignment is used). After that, all subsequent invoices are billed on the 20th (which is what 368 demonstrates).

Reviewer: Got it!

|===

> Note that `BUNDLE` billing alignment applies only to subscriptions that are part of the same bundle and does not affect subscriptions created in different bundles. So, when multiple subscriptions are created in different bundles, each one is still billed as per its creation date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
*Note:* `BUNDLE` billing alignment applies only to subscriptions within a single bundle. This type of billing alignment does not affect subscriptions across different bundles. So, when multiple subscriptions are created in different bundles, each one is still billed as per its creation date.
```

Reviewer: I wanted to make this more clear; not sure if I did. I'm not sure what "one" in the last sentence refers to. It could refer to "bundle" or "subscription." 

Also, this note should go at the beginning of the "BUNDLE Billing Alignment" section because we can't assume readers will read to the very end of a section.

Author: @FlowWriter, "one" refers to subscriptions.  I had not added the text at the beginning as I did not want to confuse users with too much information at the start. However, the [note] feature is good, I wasn't aware of it, it differentiates the "note" from the main text. So, I've now added the note to the start of the document.

Reviewer: I think the last sentence (since it's repeating what's mentioned in the beginning of the section) isn't necessary. I still think this note belongs in the beginning of the section because you can't assume the reader will read all the way to the end of the section.

== Additional Information

> https://docs.killbill.io/latest/userguide_subscription.html#components-catalog[Subscription Billing User Guide]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://docs.killbill.io/latest/userguide_subscription.html#components-catalog[_Subscription Billing User Guide_]
```

> https://docs.killbill.io/latest/invoice_subsystem.html[Invoice Subsystem]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
https://docs.killbill.io/latest/invoice_subsystem.html[_Invoice Subsystem_] manual
```
